
    
 1r:1 
[Letterhead: Goupil Paris]

Paris, 2 Sept. 1875

My dear Theo,
This morning I heard from Pa and from you the news of Uncle Jan’s death.1 Such things make us say, ‘O Lord, join us intimately to one another and let our love for Thee make that bond ever stronger’2 and ‘Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man’.3
In the first crate of paintings going to Holland you’ll find a few lithographs and that engraving after Rembrandt.4 The two lithographs after Bonington will no doubt be to your liking. At the same time I’m sending a couple of photos for Pa of pictures by Jules Breton and Corot; I’ll write ‘for Helvoirt’ on the back.
I’ve never heard of the painter Pynas you write about; I’m eager to see the painting in question.5 Nor do I know that lithograph after Diaz, ‘A monk’.6 
 1r:2 
Last Sunday I was in the Louvre (on Sunday I often go either there or to the Luxembourg); I wish you could see the Van Ostade, his own family, himself, his wife and, I believe, 8 children, all in black, the wife and girls with white caps and neckerchiefs in a stately old Dutch room with a large fireplace, oak wainscoting and ceiling and whitewashed walls with paintings in black frames. In the corner of the room a large bed with blue curtains and blanket.7 Rembrandt’s ‘Supper at Emmaus’, of which I wrote,8 has been engraved,9 Messrs G&Co. will publish the engraving in the autumn. Do you ever visit Borchers? It seems to me that his mother is a distinguished lady.10 Go out often, if you can, I mean of course to visit Caroline van Stockum, the Carbentuses, Haanebeeks, Borchers &c.; not to Kraft’s11 or Marda’s,12 you understand! Or it would have to be because you couldn’t do otherwise, just once or twice can do no harm.
How are things at the gallery? I know all about how it can be sometimes, but anyway, do whatever your hand finds to do.13
And I wish you the very best, and write again soon. Ever,

Your loving brother
Vincent

Herewith a note for Borchers. Regards to everyone at the Rooses’ and to all who ask after me. B.14 tells me that Weehuizen died,15 I didn’t know, were you there?
  
         
      
         
      
         
      
***http://vangoghletters.org/vg/letters/let042/letter.html***