
    
 1r:1 
My dear friend Rappard,
Are you continuing to make a good recovery? I do so long to have news of you. I recently bought 21 volumes of The Graphic, namely 1870-1880. What do you say about that? I’ll receive them this week, I hope. I got them very cheaply, you understand, otherwise I couldn’t have managed it. But I heard that they were for sale and got someone else interested who also appreciates them.1
Since your illness I’ve been working hard on Black and White drawings, and I hope to learn a thing or two from these Graphics about the strengths of black and white. I wish we could talk to each other again, because, old chap, what a lot there still is to do!
What I’ve been toiling at in particular lately is heads — Heads of the people — including fishermen’s heads with sou’westers.2
When I’ve looked through The Graphics I’ll write to you about them at greater length. Of course I’m bound to have many duplicates. 
 1v:2 
Now I’ll be pleased to hear more about the batch that you bought, not just whether or not there are duplicates but also in general what interesting prints you find.
I found a girl’s head by Percy Macquoid that’s wonderfully fine, a woodcut after a painting by him.3 Other fine prints I’ve found since include


  
    B. Constant
    Sick fellahs beside the Nile4
  
  
    Julien Dupré
    Herdswoman5
  
  
    Smith
     A street in South Lambeth6
  
  
    Ridley
    Boat race7
  
  
    Robinson
    ditto8
  
  
    Green
    Street in Whitechapel9
  
  
    Régamey
    Prison in New York10
  
  
    Thulstrup
    Workroom in Sailors hospital or home11
  
  
    Abbey
    Winter girl12
  
  
    ,,             
    Peter Stuyvesandt13
  
  
    Reinhart 
    Fishermen14
  
  
    Barnard
    6 sheets15
  
  
    Ed. Frère
    Wood gatherers16
  
  
    Buckman
    donkeys on Hampstead Heath17
  
  
    ,,             
    Gathering poppies18
  
  
    Walker
    Tip girls (Miners)19
  


















 1v:3 
I had to go to some trouble to get The Graphic. For example, I had to do two portraits (two of each!) of the father and mother of the Jew I bought them from.20 But isn’t it a lucky find! But it’s so odd that they’re already my property and yet I still haven’t seen them. They’re stored with another large batch of books in a saleroom, but the Jew will get them out this week.
Among the books is La mascarade humaine, 100 lithographs by Gavarni.21 I have them but do you? And the Jew has other things as well that are probably good.
Well, more soon. I hope you make a good recovery, in haste.

Ever yours,
Vincent
  
         
      
         
      
         
      
***http://vangoghletters.org/vg/letters/let302/letter.html***