
    
 1r:1 
My dear Theo,
Here are a couple more cartes de visite to give you an idea of that decoration for Hermans — of which these are two canvases.1
Rappard is here at the moment and sends you his regards.2 He’s made a very fine study of a girl’s head and one of a farmyard, and two small ones of ox-carts.3 And various others that he’s planning should follow.
I’m working on a figure of a shepherd wearing a greatcoat — which is the same size as the woman spinning.4
And apart from that a study of two Pollard willows with the yellow leaves of poplars behind them and a view across the fields.5 
 1v:2 
It’s extraordinarily beautiful here at the moment with the autumnal effects. In a fortnight we’ll have the real fall of the leaves — when everything that’s on the trees falls in a few days.
If I have some luck with the shepherd, it will be a figure that will have something of the very old Brabant in it. Anyway, it isn’t finished yet, and we’ll see how it turns out.
You could have dropped me a line in reply to what I wrote to you recently — it seems to me — even if it was only because it might shake up your own ideas, perhaps. For my part — despite much old and new sorrow — I have less and less doubt about my future, both as to my work and even as to myself. 
 1v:3 
All the same, I know that I’ll have many a struggle in both respects — that both my work and I myself will meet with resistance, will make a bad impression in many cases, but not in all.
And as to my work, I become keener on it by the day, and I’m regaining my high spirits as if I were 20.
So I must see to it that I go to Antwerp sometime — often enough in the past6 I’ve sold things that authorities declared unsaleable. If I wanted to sell something in the past then it didn’t always fall through if I really wanted someone to take this thing or that.
And perhaps you’re right that I should just find a way for my work myself, and become my own dealer. Anyway.
Regards.

Yours truly,
Vincent
  
         
      
         
      
         
      
***http://vangoghletters.org/vg/letters/let466/letter.html***