
    
 1r:1 
[Letterhead: Goupil and Boussod Paris]

19 October 1888

My dear Vincent,
It’s indeed quite a serious oversight on my part to have spoken to you about De Haan and Isaäcson and not to have said what they’ve already done.1 I wanted above all to keep you au courant with what kind of people they are. The large painting, I haven’t seen it, but judging by a photograph taken of a drawing, 
 1r:2  it shouldn’t have been as bad as all that. The subject is Uriel Acosta before a tribunal; it’s a scene from Jewish history. The composition has nothing of Rembrandt about it, as the light isn’t concentrated on part of the painting but well spread all over it; however, as the costumes are from that period, people said it was a poor imitation of Rembrandt.2 It’s certain that he has been subject to his influence, but even so, there’s a really personal quality in what I’ve seen of him; it’s the way of spreading the light throughout his drawing. It’s mainly charcoal drawings that I’ve seen, their things having stayed in Holland. 
 1v:3  I’ll send you two photos of the drawings, so that you can judge; the photos have come out very badly, because the drawings are matt.3 They consider Breitner one of the strongest of the Dutch today; I don’t believe they put him above J. Maris, but well above Israëls. I believe that if you knew them you’d share my view, and that you wouldn’t have suspicions. I’ve seen nothing of Isaäcson yet apart from his croquis, which are very good and very original. He’s waiting for some drawings that should come back from London. Seurat isn’t in town yet, and I don’t know what he’s doing.4 He’s very strong, that fellow, and I agree with you that his carefully chosen frame was well worth all manner of expensive frames.5 Recently I’ve 
 1v:4  read Tartarin de Tarascon, which I find very fine, and Le Nabab, which I like much less. I’ll read the other Tartarin as well.6 Madame Chrysanthème7 isn’t in the library,8 but somebody has promised to let me have it to read. I’m curious to know it. It’s very annoying that you’ve had trouble with your eyes; where does that come from? So Gauguin’s coming; that will make a big change in your life. I hope that your efforts will succeed in making your house a place where artists will feel at home. 
I’ll stop, because otherwise the letter won’t go off this evening.

Yours truly,
Theo
  
         
      
         
      
         
      
***http://vangoghletters.org/vg/letters/let708/letter.html***