
    
 1r:1 
Paris 5 June 1890

My dear Vincent,
We’re as pleased as can be that you were able to write to us that you’re still well and that the stay in Auvers has had rather a good influence on your health. Yesterday Dr Gachet came to see me, and unfortunately there were people there, which prevented me from talking with him much, but what he said to me 
 1v:2  was that he thought you cured and that he saw no need at all for it to recur. He has invited us to come to his house next Sunday, where you would be too. We’d darned well like to do it, but all the same it isn’t possible for Jo to promise it outright. We went to St-Cloud on Whit Sunday, and there we had that terrible downpour that must have fallen where you are too. Although the little one didn’t catch cold he’s been all upset since then, probably by the crowd we were obliged to pass through. Would you go and see Dr Gachet and tell him that if  the weather is fine we accept with great pleasure, 
 1v:3  but that we dare not promise outright, and that if we come we’d want to be home again before the evening. There’s a train at 5.58 which we’d take. In the morning we’d leave with the 10.25 train, which arrives at Chaponval at 11.26.1 The Dr said to get off there, that he wanted to come to meet us.
My dear fellow, the letter had to wait awhile again and I must finish it in haste. The exhibition is giving me an enormous amount of work but also satisfaction.2 Tasset has sent the colours today,3 and they leave tomorrow with the Bargues.4
Guillaumin has placed at your disposal a magnificent painting which was at Tanguy’s, Sunset.5 It will look good in your studio. Gausson wants to do an exchange with you, anything you want of his in exchange for 
 1r:4  what you want to give him.6 I told him to come one day with me to see you at your place. Aurier will also come one day. He’s very pleased with your painting,7 and will come with me one Sunday to see you. I must say goodbye. I’ll come in any case at the stated time. Jo sends her warm regards, and a smile from the little one.
    
Yours,
Theo

Don’t wear yourself out, and take good care of yourself, regards to the doctor. Have your things finally arrived?8
  
         
      
         
      
         
      
***http://vangoghletters.org/vg/letters/let880/letter.html***