
    
 1r:1 
Paris, 19 March 1890

My dear Vincent,
We were really pleased to receive your last letter, but we’re sorry from the bottom of our hearts that you can’t give us better news.1 You’ll need an enormous amount of patience to overcome the trouble your condition must cause you.2 However, there’s a tendency to improvement, which we must begin by being extremely glad about. The cold weather always has an influence on you, and so it’s possible that milder weather will cure you entirely, 
 1v:2  let’s hope so, and don’t tire yourself out too much.
How pleased I would have been if you’d been there at the Independents’ exhibition.3 It was the day of the private viewing when Carnot came.4 I was there with Jo. Your paintings are well placed and look very well. Many people came up to ask me to give you their compliments. Gauguin said that your paintings are the key to the exhibition. He suggests an exchange of one of his canvases for the one of the Alpilles.5 I told him that I didn’t think you’d have any objection, on the contrary that it would please you that he likes your painting. I also like it very much, that painting, and it looks admirably well in the exhibition.
Seurat exhibited a most curious painting there, searching to express 
 1v:3  things through the direction of the line.6 Certainly he expresses movement, but it has a most curious appearance and not very generous as regards ideas. Guillaumin is exhibiting several things, some very good ones among them,7 De Lautrec has an excellent portrait of a woman at the piano, and a large painting which holds its own very well.8 There’s a great distinction in it, despite the risqué subject. In general it’s noticeable that the public is beginning to be more and more interested in the young Impressionists, there are at least a certain number of art lovers who are beginning to buy them. The Pissarro exhibition is over, lots of people came, and 5 were sold.9 For the moment that’s all we were hoping for. Next Sunday Bernard and Aurier are to come and see your latest 
 1r:4  canvases. Bernard has been a bit ill but is feeling better. Enclosed with this you’ll find a letter from Aurier. He’s to come shortly to see the Gauguins and do an article on him. I’ve received the money for your painting from Brussels,10 and Maus writes to me: ‘When you have an opportunity please tell your brother that I was very happy that he participated in the Salon of Les Vingt where, in the melée of discussions, he found lively artistic sympathies’.11 Do you want me to send you the money? I’m holding it for you for whenever you want it. I hope, my dear brother, that you can soon give us more satisfactory news of your health. You’d feel happier if you saw your little godson. Try to find out from Dr Peyron if he sees no danger in your coming to Paris when you’ve recovered from this crisis. Jo sends you her warm regards, and joins with me in sending best wishes for your speedy recovery.
Good handshake.

Theo
  
         
      
         
      
         
      
***http://vangoghletters.org/vg/letters/let858/letter.html***